Page_2 : 
The fortunateness of my existence, its uniqueness perhaps, lies in its fatality: to express it in the form of a riddle, as my father I have already died, as my mother I still live and grow old. This twofold origin, as it war from the highese and lowest rung of the ladder of life, at once décadent and beginning - this if anything explains that neutrality, that freedom from party in relation to the total problem of life which perhaps distinguishes me. I have a subtler sense for signs of ascent and decline than any man has ever had, I am the teach 'par excellence' in this matter - I know both, Ia am both. - My father died at the age of thirth-six: he was deli-cate, lovable and morbid, like a being destined to pay this world only a passing visit - a gracious reminder of life rather than life itself. In the same year in which his life declined mine too declined: in the thirty-sixth year of my life I arrived at ther lowest point of my vitality - I still lived, but without being able to see  three paces in front of me. At that time - it was 1879 - I relinquished mt Basel professorship, lived through the summer like a shadow in St Moritz and the following winter, the most sunless of my life, as a shadow in Naumburg. This was my minimum: " The Wanderer and his Shadow" came in to existence during the course of it. 

Page_3 : 
i undoutedly knew all about shadows in those days... In the following winter, the first winter I spent in Genoa, that sweetening and spritualization wich is virtually insepar-able from and extreme poverty of blood and muscle produced 'Daybreak'. The perfect brightness and cheerfullness, even exuberance, but even with the profoundest physiological weakness, but even with an extremity of pain. In the midst of the torments which attended an uninterrupted three-day headache accompaied by the laborious vomiting of phlegm - I possessed a dialecical clarity 'par excellence' and thought mt way very cold-bloodedly through things for which when i am in better health I am not enough of a climber, not refined, not 'cold' eniugh. Myreaders perhaps know the extent to which I regard dealectics as a symptom of 'decadence'. for example in the most famous case of all: in the case of Socrates. - All morbid disturbances of the intel-lect, even that semi-stupedaction consequent on fever, have remained to this day totally unfamiliar things to me, on their nature and frequency I had firstto instruct mtself by schlarly methods. My blood flows slowly. No one has ever been able to diagnose fever in me. A doctor whe treated me for some time as a nervous case said ar last: " No! There is nothing wrong with your nerves, it is only I who am nervous. ' Any kind of local degeneration absolutely undem-instrablr; no oganically originating stomach ailment, though there does exist, as a consequence of general exhaus-tion, a profound weakness of the gastric system. Condition of the eyes, sometimes approaching dangerously close to blindness, also only consequence, not causal: so that with every increase in vitality eyesight has also again improved.





